KEP4328: Affinity Based Eviction (#4329)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-scheduling/4328-node-affinity-based-eviction/README.md

Reviewer: I think this is describing _preemption_, more than eviction. See https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/ for how Kubernetes uses these terms.

Author: I believe this is more an `eviction` thing than preemption. We only want to evict the pods which don't match the nodes anymore. No pods with higher priority are involved.

> I think this is describing preemption,

What makes you think this way? Maybe sth of my description is misleading.

Reviewer: OK, that makes sense.

[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

This KEP aims to introduce node-affinity-based eviction.
In this KEP, we will introduce a new nodeAffinity type: `requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution`.
A new controller called `node-affinity-eviction` will be added to the controller-manager. 
This controller will monitor changes in node labels, and evict pods `tolerationSeconds` after their `requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` node affinity is no longer met, 

## Motivation

- Enable `requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` node affinity for pod scheduling and execution.
- Provide users with greater control over pod placement.
- Ensure predictable and consistent pod behavior in various scenarios.
- Address use cases with specific placement and execution requirements.
  
### Goals

- Introduce the `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` **nodeAffinity** type.
- Add `node-affinity-eviction` controller to ensure pods being evicted if the selectors are no longer met at runtime.

### Non-Goals

> - This KEP does not aim to introduce the `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` **podAffinity** type and **podAntiAffinity** type.

Reviewer 2: I think it would be useful to also explore the additional descheduling effects even though we will not implement them.

Reviewer 3: +1

Reviewer 4: The descheduler `RemovePodsViolatingNodeAffinity` strategy allows to restrict the set of pods that get affected. So only e.g. low-impact pods get evicted. Nevertheless, if this "additional feature" is not a priority, the descheduler strategy can be deprecated and removed eventually.

- This feature does not respect PodDisruptionBudget during the eviction.

## Proposal
- Implement the `requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` node affinity type.
- Update the kube-scheduler, kube-controller-manager and kube-apiserver.
- Define the behavior, syntax, and use cases in documentation.
- Facilitate testing, adoption, and maintenance of this feature.

### User Stories (Optional)

> #### Manage Multi Tenant Cluster with dedicated nodes

Reviewer 2: I understand the usefulness of this feature, but it would be good to see some RFEs and user expectations for this feature.

I have some nodes labeled with "userA=allow" and "userB=allow", which means that these nodes are available to user A and user B.
As the scale grows, I added more nodes for user B, and all existing nodes are only available to user A.

> I can simply delete the "userB=allow" label from the existing nodes to re-schedule all pods of user B to these new nodes.

Reviewer 3: As mentioned by @alculquicondor https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4329#issuecomment-1934725980

> The existing user story actually justifies the global nature **[of descheduler]**, more than the per-Pod choice **[of this KEP]**.

Would be cool to have other User Stories justifying the KEP from other user perspectives. Or as @atiratree said, if you can find specific User Requests that corroborate with the `per-Pod choice` approach linked here.

[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

This KEP aims to introduce node-affinity-based eviction.
In this KEP, we will introduce a new nodeAffinity type: `requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution`.
A new controller called `node-affinity-eviction` will be added to the controller-manager. 
This controller will monitor changes in node labels and evict pods when their `requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` node affinity is no longer met.

## Motivation

- Enable `requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` node affinity for pod scheduling and execution.
- Provide users with greater control over pod placement.
- Ensure predictable and consistent pod behavior in various scenarios.
- Address use cases with specific placement and execution requirements.
  
### Goals

- Introduce the `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` **nodeAffinity** type.
- Add `node-affinity-eviction` controller to ensure pods being evicted if the selectors are no longer met at runtime.

### Non-Goals

- This KEP does not aim to introduce the `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` **podAffinity** type and **podAntiAffinity** type.

> - This feature does not respect PodDisruptionBudget during the eviction.

Author: Pod-affinity-eviction will be more complicated than node-affinity-eviction. We will consider it in the future, but even if we decide to implement it, it will definitely need another KEP.

> - This feature does not respect PodDisruptionBudget during the eviction.

Reviewer 5: What I refer to is the PDB. Can we consider evictionAPI directly here? @alculquicondor  I know we use Delete op directly in scheduler right now, the taint-eviction, preemption, but evictionAPI seems a better choice, no longer to consider the PDB.

> - This feature does not respect PodDisruptionBudget during the eviction.

Reviewer 6: > it's hard to respect PDB under this framework.

doesn't the evictionAPI handle that for you?

TBH, I'm not really sure which approach to take, and I'm not sure why taint based evictions chose not to respect PDB. It might be that both features were developed in parallel without paying much attention to each other.

Let me try to pull in some long timers: @damemi @bsalamat @liggitt @wojtek-t

> - This feature does not respect PodDisruptionBudget during the eviction.

Author: > doesn't the evictionAPI handle that for you?

What I concerned is how we handle the evict failure due to PDB.
If we choose to save the pod info in memory and retry the evict every once in a while, It will bring a lot of memory consumption and CPU consumption in a large cluster.

So I think we need to change the current controller framework(listening to events and trigger deletion) to a framework similar to deschduler (there is a loop to continuously check each pod) to reduce memory consumption, but it may increase CPU consumption.

> - This feature does not respect PodDisruptionBudget during the eviction.

Reviewer 5: This is a problem either way, delete(with PDB) or evict. I would like the lightweight approach - ignore the evict error for PDB, and people can choose rescheduler for a strict policy. Seems we found the boundary... I don't know.

> - This feature does not respect PodDisruptionBudget during the eviction.

Author: @kerthcet @alculquicondor Just came up with another thought: Why don't we let users to decide?

So I found this KEP: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/3280
It seems that we introduced a new field `AllowDisruptionByPriorityGreaterThanOrEqual`, which can allow users to decide whether this pod can be evicted when eviction will violate PDBs.

We can do the same for this node-affinity, maybe sth like this:
```
type RequiredExecutionTerm struct {
	Required          NodeSelectorTerm
	TolerationSeconds *int64
        RespectPDB        bool
}
```

If `RespectPDB ` is set to true, we evict pods with evictionAPI and ignore the evict error.
If not, we just delete the pod.

> - This feature does not respect PodDisruptionBudget during the eviction.

Reviewer 6: I would start as simple as possible and just respect PDB in all scenarios (no boolean and no tolerationSeconds).

Is there any reason (other than implementation details) that this wouldn't make sense for your stories? It fits the migration story in the case of multitenant nodes.

> - This feature does not respect PodDisruptionBudget during the eviction.

Author: If it's just for `migration story`, `just respect PDB in all scenarios (no boolean and no tolerationSeconds)` this is totally ok.

> - This feature does not respect PodDisruptionBudget during the eviction.

Reviewer 2: So far we have seen problems with every kind of an eviction/deletion and I think it would be better to be cautious here as it is quite hard/impossible to backtrack on these decisions.

There is a potential to hurt the availability of existing workloads. The bright side is that this is configured by the application or a user/entity deploying it. The not-so-bright side is that the app does not have all the information about when and where it will run.
- Is the app rollout in progress?
- Is there a PDB configured? If so, is it blocking?
- Are there enough resources on other nodes once the app is evicted? Is the Kubelet going to repel the Pod?
- Does a migration need to occur, before the Pod should be terminated? Is the entity doing the migration the same entity that is deploying the application?

I am also concerned about what will happen if we make a convention about the behavior and then we add other descheduling effects like the pod affinity. This will increase the changes that the user will shoot themselves in the foot.

I am exploring a new feature in the [Declarative Node Maintenance KEP](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4213) called `EvacuationRequest`. Which is softer than evictions are and gives more control to the application's hands.

My main point is, is there a reason why the eviction should be immediate? 

Hard to Soft evictions:

`Delete with grace period 0 >  Node Eviction > Delete > Peemption Eviction > Eviction API > Eviction API with PDB > EvacuationRequest`

In my opinion, it would be better to start with the softest approach as the default behavior and if there are use cases that we deem reasonable we could offer configurability of this scale.

## Proposal
- Implement the `requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` node affinity type.
- Update the kube-scheduler, kube-controller-manager and kube-apiserver.
- Define the behavior, syntax, and use cases in documentation.
- Facilitate testing, adoption, and maintenance of this feature.

### User Stories (Optional)

#### Optimizing Workloads Migrating
As an engineer of an AI-platform, we have different deployments for inference/training. 
Our different deployments require different types of gpu.
For example, some can only run on nodes with `gpu-type-name=T4`, and some can only run on nodes with `gpu-type-name=P100`.
There are also some deployments which can run on both nodes(They may have made adaptations or they may not need a GPU at all).

Sometimes, our customers want to add some new powerful machines to the cluster.
For example, some machines with gpu type `T4`, but better ssd and more cpu are added to the cluster.
As a result, they want to migrate old deployments that must use T4 GPUs to these powerful new machines. 
As for the old machines, they can continue to run some services that do not require `T4` GPUs.

> With this feature, I can simply remove `gpu-type-name=T4` label from the old node and adds it to the new nodes, so I can move target deployments and keep the remaining pods intact.

Reviewer 6: I still believe this is the wrong use case. Your story says: "they want to migrate old deployments", but then you change the nodes, meaning that this is an action done by a cluster administrator.

It would be more appropriate for a user to add a nodeSelector for something like "ssd=true". Then they control the timing of the migration.

Or, if it has to be an administrator operation, the administrator would add a taint to the original nodepool, something like "legacy=true".

I want to support this feature, but your use case is unfortunately not sound.

Reviewer 6: labels generally represent a characteristic of the node. The original nodes still have a GPU T4, so it's not appropriate to change it.

Author: > It would be more appropriate for a user to add a nodeSelector for something like "ssd=true".

In the long run, yes. But if none of the current deployments have node-affinity "ssd=true". It will be more convenient to change the node's label to achieve this purpose(migration).
Yea, I agree it sounds like there's a better solution at the first place...

> I want to support this feature, but your use case is unfortunately not sound.

So, story 1 is what we actually encountered in real life, now it looks like some historical debt.
What about story 2? Is it a valid case to you ? @alculquicondor

Author: > labels generally represent a characteristic of the node. The original nodes still have a GPU T4, so it's not appropriate to change it.

So, `gpu-type-name=T4` sounds like it tells the gpu type of the node. But in our case, I think it's more like `allow-services-requiresT4-runs=true`, meaning this node allow services which requires gpu type T4 runs on it.
And in our case, it's appropriate to change the old machine, as it is considered obsolete by us, we don't want our main services running on it, but we still want it to continue running some less important services.

Reviewer 6: > And in our case, it's appropriate to change the old machine, as it is considered obsolete by us.

Again, why not use a taint to mark obsolete nodes instead?

Author: That would be we didn't add corresponding tolerations to deployments before🤦.
I agree this is more like a fix for the inappropriate use of scheduling by users, rather than a common scenario.

I'll make `Multi Tenant` the only user case.

Reviewer 6: You don't have to have tolerations in your deployments. That's actually the point. Because you don't have tolerations, your Pods would be evicted and they would be ok to run in the new nodes.

Author: There are also deployments which we don't want to be moved from old machines, so we have to add toleration for those deployments.
But let's get over with this as this story is already removed from kep😂.

So far descheduler has the ability to achieve this goal. 
However, bringing a new component to the system introduces both a lot of uncertainty and additional learning costs. 
So as a user, I hope that kubernetes can natively support this feature so that users can do it without spending extra learning costs.

> #### Manage Multi Tenant Cluster

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
#### Manage Multi Tenant Cluster with dedicated nodes
```

Reviewer 6: Also, if this is the primary use case, it should go first.

It could just be the only case, given that the other one is not convincing.

Author: I made it the only case, consider the other one is too special.

I have some nodes labeled with "userA=allow" and "userB=allow", which means that these nodes are available to user A and user B.
As the scale grows, I added more nodes for user B, and all existing nodes are only available to user A.
I can simply delete the "userB=allow" label from the existing nodes to re-schedule all pods of user B to these new nodes.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

N/A

### Risks and Mitigations

The major concern for this controller may be the overhead of the nodes with a large number of pods. 
Every time a node's label is updated, the controller needs to iterate all pods assigned to the node. This may cause potential scaling issues.

> However, the impact won't be significant due to the limitation on the number of pods per node.

Author: Yes, I think users should be aware this risk and not set this affinity if they don't want their workloads to be disrupted,

> However, the impact won't be significant due to the limitation on the number of pods per node.

Reviewer 4: Users do not always have the possibility to choose

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

- [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - Feature gate name: NodeAffinityEviction
  - Components depending on the feature gate: kube-controller-manager, kube-scheduler, kube-apiserver

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

No. It's a new API field, so no default behavior will be impacted.

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

The feature can be disabled in Alpha and Beta versions by restarting kube-controller-manager, kube-scheduler and kube-apiserver with the feature-gate off. 
After the feature-gate is disabled and kube-controller-manager is restarted, 
`node-affinity-eviction` controller will also be disabled.
In terms of Stable versions, users can choose to opt-out by not setting the corresponding field.

###### What happens if we reenable the feature if it was previously rolled back?

The `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` node affinity will take effect as expected.

###### Are there any tests for feature enablement/disablement?

> Yes. Unit tests for this will be added to `pkg/registry/core/pod/strategy_test.go`.

Reviewer 6: We also need unit/integration tests for the new controller, making sure that pods are not evicted when the feature is disabled.

Author: >  The e2e framework does not currently support enabling or disabling feature
gates. However, unit tests in each component dealing with managing data, created
with and without the feature, are necessary. At the very least, think about
conversion tests if API types are being modified.
> Additionally, for features that are introducing a new API field, unit tests that
are exercising the `switch` of feature gate itself (what happens if I disable a
feature gate after having objects written with the new field) are also critical.
You can take a look at one potential example of such test in:
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/97058/files#diff-7826f7adbc1996a05ab52e3f5f02429e94b68ce6bce0dc534d1be636154fded3R246-R282

Copied from template, I think the tests this question cares is the `switch` of the feature itself. 
The tests you said should belong to `Test Plan` part, and are added.

Reviewer 6: Integration tests are not affected by the comment above. Only E2E tests.

- Delete the Pod

- Re-start kube-controller-manager, kube-scheduler and kube-apiserver with feature gate enabled
- Create `test-pod` again.
- Verify that the pod is correctly scheduled to the node
- Remove the node label
- Verify that the pod is evicted
- Add the node's label back
- Create `test-pod` again
  
- Re-start kube-controller-manager, kube-scheduler and kube-apiserver with feature gate disabled
- Verify the old `.spec.affinity.nodeAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` reserved
- Remove the node label 
- Verify that the pod is not evicted
- Add the node's label back 

- Re-start kube-controller-manager, kube-scheduler and kube-apiserver with feature gate enabled
- Remove the node label
- Verify that the pod is evicted 

###### Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.?

No.

### Monitoring Requirements

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

- Inspect the `.spec.affinity.nodeAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` configuration.

> - Check the corresponding metrics(details in SLIs part below).

Reviewer 6: This should go first

###### How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their instance?

- [x] Events
  - Event Reason: NodeAffinityEviction
- [x] API .status
  - Condition reason: DeletionByNodeAffinityEvictionController 
- [x] Other (treat as last resort)
  - Details: Pod with `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` must meet affinity rule during both the scheduling phase and the execution phase.

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

N/A

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

- [x] Metrics
  - Metric name:
    - pod_deletions_node_affinity_total(counts the number of Pods deleted because of nodeAffinity since this contoller start)

>     - pod_deletions_node_affinity_duration_seconds(latency, in seconds, between the time when a node's label has been changed and the pod been deleted via node-affinity-eviction Controller)

Reviewer 6: Let's remove this metric. It might cost some engineering just to get a reasonable value, and it will not be a reliable number anyway.

Two new metrics will be added.

### Dependencies

N/A

###### Does this feature depend on any specific services running in the cluster?

No.

### Scalability

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new API calls?

- There will be calls to PATCH pod status.
- There will be calls to delete pod.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in introducing new API types?

No.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new calls to the cloud provider?

No.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing size or count of the existing API objects?

It increasing the size of `.spec.affinity.nodeAffinity` a little bit.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing time taken by any operations covered by existing SLIs/SLOs?

If `.spec.affinity.nodeAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` field is defined, this feature will slightly increase the pod scheduling time and increase the possibility of pods being evicted.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in non-negligible increase of resource usage (CPU, RAM, disk, IO, ...) in any components?

> No.

Reviewer 6: CPU, as described in the previous question.

Also, I want to ensure my PDB is guaranteed, so I can't taint the node directly.

[stack overflow link](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/55006205/how-to-prevent-pods-scheduling-to-a-node-after-a-pod-has-failed-on-it-in-gce)

Without `node-affinity-eviction`, I have to relabel the node to suggest data on that node is corrupted, 
and then manually iterating the pods on the node, decide whether to delete them to trigger a reschedule.
With `node-affinity-eviction`, the only thing I need to do is to relabel the node, and `node-affinity-eviction` controller will do the rest.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

N/A

### Risks and Mitigations

The major concern for this controller may be the overhead of the nodes with a large number of pods. 
Every time a node's label is updated, the controller needs to iterate all pods assigned to the node. This may cause potential scaling issues.
However, the impact won't be significant due to the limitation on the number of pods per node.

## Design Details

Introducing a new type of NodeAffinity:
```go
type NodeSelector struct {
	NodeSelectorTerms []NodeSelectorTerm
}

type NodeAffinity struct {

> 	RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution *NodeSelector

Reviewer 2: Can you please add the documentation for this and the expected behavior?

}
```

Add a controller called `node-affinity-eviction` 

The controller do the following things:

- Listening to the changes of node labels
- Iterating over all pods assigned to the node, checks the NodeAffinity field, if `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` exists, checks if `NodeSelector` still match the new node. 
- If `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` is no loger met, trying to evict the pod.

> - It will add a DisruptionTarget condition with corresponding reason and message for the pod.

Author: > API initiated eviction already adds DisruptionTarget target eviction just before the deletion.

In that case, I agree we should let API handle the condition.

- It will use Eviction API with PDB to evict the pod. 

> - If the eviction fails, the pod will remain unchanged with a new pod condition.

Reviewer 2: can you please expand on this a bit more?

The PDB can fail for different reasons (API unavailability, conflicts, PDB, webhooks).
Do we retry any of these? And which ones?

The application state or the the API availability can change. Retries would be better for the reproducibility of the state of the cluster. 
- then there are scalability considerations
- observability/debuggability considerations 

As mentioned, [Evacuation API](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4565) is planned to solve these problems. I hope we manage to introduce it in 1.31, but it is not 100% certain.

Just saying that it might be good to consider waiting for the Evacuation API.

We can also proceed with the eviction today and switch to it in beta as you mentioned. There are two paths we can take
1. Either do a simple eviction without all the handling and mention all the drawbacks. In all the the communication (API, docs, blog). And condition the graduation on fixing all these.
2. Do the complex eviction (similar to the Evacuation API) and bear the burden of implementing, testing and maintaining it.

Author: I think we should skip the failure due to a violation of the PDB. And for the rest type of failure, we should retry for some specific times.

[Evacuation API](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4565) can definitely help this KEP a lot.

However, my intention is still to introduce both KEPs simultaneously. I lean towards path 1. We can use the eviction API during the alpha stage and switch to the Evacuation API by default during the beta stage. When the feature gate for the Evacuation API is disabled, we can fall back to using the eviction API for eviction. Additionally, we can graduate this KEP after the Evacuation API has graduated.

This approach allows us to meet the needs of users who do not rely on PDB earlier. Furthermore, this KEP serves as a starting point for bringing descheduler functionality upstream. Introducing this KEP at an earlier stage allows us to better observe relevant data and discuss better ways to bring other descheduler functionalities (such as requiredPodAffinity) upstream.

Reviewer 2: Ok.

Nevertheless, you should highlight/explain how we plan to reconcile the evictions in v1alpha1.

>  we will keep the original Pod unchanged and ignore the eviction.
> If the eviction continues to fail after multiple retries, we will keep the original Pod unchanged and ignore the eviction. 

especially these parts

also what is the backoff, so the following does not become spammy

> Relevant logs will be printed for every failure.

the last one is more of an implementation nit though

New condition:
```go
		v1.PodCondition{
			Type:    v1.DisruptionTarget,
			Status:  v1.ConditionTrued,
			Reason:  "DeletionByNodeAffinityEviction",
			Message: "deleting due to mismatched node affinities",
		}

> ```

Reviewer 2: we should include an impact on the daemonset controller. It does its own scheduling and should be tested, that we are not causing a hot loop between scheduling and descheduling.

Author: Added to `Integration tests`

- Re-start kube-controller-manager, kube-scheduler and kube-apiserver with feature gate enabled
- Remove the node label
- Verify that the pod is evicted 

###### Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.?

No.

### Monitoring Requirements

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

- Check the corresponding metrics(details in SLIs part below).
- Inspect the `.spec.affinity.nodeAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` configuration.

###### How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their instance?

- [x] Events
  - Event Reason: NodeAffinityEviction
- [x] API .status
  - Condition reason: DeletionByNodeAffinityEvictionController 
- [x] Other (treat as last resort)
  - Details: Pod with `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` must meet affinity rule during both the scheduling phase and the execution phase.

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

N/A

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

- [x] Metrics

>   - Metric name:

Reviewer 2: number of eviction could be useful as well

    - pod_deletions_node_affinity_total(counts the number of Pods deleted because of nodeAffinity since this contoller start)
###### Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability of this feature?

One new metric `pod_deletions_node_affinity_total` will be added.

### Dependencies

N/A

###### Does this feature depend on any specific services running in the cluster?

No.

### Scalability

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new API calls?

- There will be calls to PATCH pod status.

> - There will be calls to delete pod.

Reviewer 2: evict  pod call instead of these?

to re-schedule all pods of user B to these new nodes.

#### handle data locality pods when data is corrupted

I have one application whose pods need to be co-located with some specific data stored in some particular nodes. 
When one node's storage is corrupted, the pod on this node will provide some inaccurate services.
So I want it to be scheduled to another special node when data is detected to be corrupted.
And in the meantime, I want to keep other running pods on that node intact.
Also, I want to ensure my PDB is guaranteed, so I can't taint the node directly.

[stack overflow link](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/55006205/how-to-prevent-pods-scheduling-to-a-node-after-a-pod-has-failed-on-it-in-gce)

Without `node-affinity-eviction`, I have to relabel the node to suggest data on that node is corrupted, 
and then manually iterating the pods on the node, decide whether to delete them to trigger a reschedule.
With `node-affinity-eviction`, the only thing I need to do is to relabel the node, and `node-affinity-eviction` controller will do the rest.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

N/A

> ### Risks and Mitigations

Reviewer 2: this should mention scenarios when the pod fails to be evicted and how it should be observed and resolved

Author: > how it should be observed

I haven't actually thought this part through yet.

So, at first my thought is to manually append an Condition for target pod.
And we decided to let Eviction API handles the condition. And I checked yesterday, seems the condition added by api will disappear after eviction failed? This doesn't seem to be easily observable by users.

I'm still thinking how we should improve its observability when the pod fails to be evicted.
Adding a metric with the label of pod's name?
Create a event to the cluster?

What's your opinion?

Reviewer 2: - if the eviction fails the Condition does not appear
- a metric could help, not sure about the events

The major concern for this controller may be the overhead of the nodes with a large number of pods. 
Every time a node's label is updated, the controller needs to iterate all pods assigned to the node. This may cause potential scaling issues.
However, the impact won't be significant due to the limitation on the number of pods per node.

> The evictions caused by this may be expensive depending on the number of pods.

Reviewer 2: and conflicts

Author: > and conflicts

Can you elaborate this more?

Reviewer 2: it depends also on the requests conflicts and blocking PDBs. There will be a lot more requests if the PDB blocks the eviction

## Design Details

Introducing a new type of NodeAffinity:
```go
type NodeSelector struct {
	NodeSelectorTerms []NodeSelectorTerm
}

type NodeAffinity struct {
	// If the affinity requirements specified by this field are not met at
	// scheduling time, the pod will not be scheduled onto the node.
	// If the affinity requirements specified by this field cease to be met
	// at some point during pod execution (e.g. due to an update), the system
	// will try to eventually evict the pod from its node.

> 	// +optional

Reviewer 2: it would be good to mention eviction behavior and PDBs here as well. And to say that applies for the v1alpha1

- If `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` is no loger met, trying to evict the pod.
- It will use Eviction API to evict the pod(The API takes the PDBs into consideration , so we do not have to use the PDBs explicitly here). 
- If eviction fails, we will take different actions based on the failure reasons:
  - If eviction fails due to a violation of the PodDisruptionBudget (PDB), we will keep the original Pod unchanged and ignore the eviction. 
  - If eviction fails for any other reason, we will attempt a certain number of retries. If the eviction continues to fail after multiple retries, we will keep the original Pod unchanged and ignore the eviction. 
  - Relevant logs will be printed for every failure.

During the alpha stage, we will use a simple eviction API to evict Pods. This may result in Pods that fail eviction needing a change in the node's labels to trigger rescheduling again.

During the beta stage, we will switch to using the [Evacuation API](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4563) if the user enables the corresponding feature gate. This will address a series of issues related to failed evictions.

> 

Reviewer 2: the daemonset parts should be mentioned also in the implementation, since it requires changes to the controller

Author: > since it requires changes to the controller

You mean daemonset controller?

I'm not familiar with ds controller. But I think ds controller will handle node label updates also?

> If node labels are changed, the DaemonSet will promptly add Pods to newly matching nodes and delete Pods from newly not-matching nodes.

For ds controller, this affinity should look like existing affinity: `requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`, and I can't think of which part of the ds controller we should modify.

Reviewer 2: ds controller does its own scheduling so it requires code changes there for the de/scheduling bits

- Test that `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` node affinity is ignored during scheduling when the feature is disabled.
- Test that DaemonSet with `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` does not enter a scheduling and descheduling hot loop after being evicted. 

##### e2e tests

These tests will be added:
- `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` will be tested during both scheduling and execution.
  1. create a node that has a label
  2. create a pod with `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` node affinity matches the node.
  3. verify that the pod is correctly scheduled to the node
  4. remove the node label
  5. verify that the pod is evicted
  6. create a new pod with same template
  7. verify that the pod failed scheduling
  8. create a new node which label matches the pod's node-affinity
  9. verify that the pod created in 6 is scheduled to the new node
   
### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha

- Feature implemented behind a feature flag
- Initial unit/e2e tests completed and enabled

> - Documentation is added to demonstrate why this is useful how exactly affinity needs to be configured

Reviewer 2: also document potential pitfalls of the eviction and handling of these.

- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

This KEP aims to introduce node-affinity-based eviction.
In this KEP, we will introduce a new nodeAffinity type: `requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution`.
A new controller called `node-affinity-eviction` will be added to the controller-manager. 
This controller will monitor changes in node labels, and try to evict pods if their `requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` node affinity are no longer met.
This controller will respect PDB during the eviction, and if eviction failed, 

> the pods will remain unchanged.

Reviewer 2: what does this mean?

to re-schedule all pods of user B to these new nodes.

#### handle data locality pods when data is corrupted

I have one application whose pods need to be co-located with some specific data stored in some particular nodes. 
When one node's storage is corrupted, the pod on this node will provide some inaccurate services.
So I want it to be scheduled to another special node when data is detected to be corrupted.
And in the meantime, I want to keep other running pods on that node intact.
Also, I want to ensure my PDB is guaranteed, so I can't taint the node directly.

[stack overflow link](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/55006205/how-to-prevent-pods-scheduling-to-a-node-after-a-pod-has-failed-on-it-in-gce)

Without `node-affinity-eviction`, I have to relabel the node to suggest data on that node is corrupted, 
and then manually iterating the pods on the node, decide whether to delete them to trigger a reschedule.
With `node-affinity-eviction`, the only thing I need to do is to relabel the node, and `node-affinity-eviction` controller will do the rest.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

N/A

### Risks and Mitigations

> The major concern for this controller may be the overhead of the nodes with a large number of pods. 

Author: I think the major concern should be the failure of eviction.  I have adjusted the order.

	// at some point during pod execution (e.g. due to an update), the system
	// will try to eventually evict the pod from its node.
  // For v1alpha1, evictions will be handled by the Eviction API, 
  // and will take the PDBs into consideration.
	// +optional
	RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution *NodeSelector
}
```

Add a controller called `node-affinity-eviction` 

The controller do the following things:

- Listening to the changes of node labels
- Iterating over all pods assigned to the node(excluding mirror pods), checks the NodeAffinity field, if `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` exists, checks if `NodeSelector` still match the new node. 
- If `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` is no loger met, trying to evict the pod.

- For alpha stage, we'll use a simple eviction API to evict Pods.
  - It will use Eviction API to evict the pod(The API takes the PDBs into consideration, so we do not have to use the PDBs explicitly here). 
  - If eviction fails, we will take different actions based on the failure reasons:
    - If eviction fails due to a violation of the PDB, we will keep the target Pod unchanged. 

>     - If eviction fails for any other reason, we will attempt a certain number of retries. If the eviction continues to fail after multiple retries, we will keep the target Pod unchanged. 

Reviewer 2: same here? What does this mean? How and why do we stop retrying?

Author: > keep the target Pod unchanged.  

This means that we will not evict this pod in the current eviction round.

> How and why do we stop retrying?

If eviction api returns a non-200/429 status multiple times, it is highly likely that there is a configuration error or an error in a specific component, and we should not continue with futile attempts?

Reviewer 2: - it would be good to distinguish what is an eviction round and how often/when that happens
- I do not think it is reasonable to do retries in one eviction round

Author: > I do not think it is reasonable to do retries in one eviction round

OK, so we'll skip the pod as long as eviction api returns a non-200 stauts?

Author: > it would be good to distinguish what is an eviction round and how often/when that happens

Added.

  - If a pod fails to be evicted during the current eviction attempt, we will retry the eviction the next time the labels of that node change.

> - After the eviction finally fails, we'll print a log to recored the event. And increase the metric `pod_failed_eviction_node_affinity_total` labeled with pod's name. So that users can find out this and take care of the pod manually.

Reviewer 2: how do we recognize a final failure?

Author: The eviction API returned a 429 status, or it continued to return a non-200 status even after multiple retries?

Reviewer 2: what do we gain from distinguishing the errors?

- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

This KEP aims to introduce node-affinity-based eviction.
In this KEP, we will introduce a new nodeAffinity type: `requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution`.
A new controller called `node-affinity-eviction` will be added to the controller-manager. 
This controller will monitor changes in node labels, and try to evict pods if their `requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` node affinity are no longer met.

> If eviction fails, the pods that failed to be evicted will be rechecked for violations of the `requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` affinity during the next node label update. 

Reviewer 2: not enough, what if the labels are never updated?

Reviewer 6: Follow conversation in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4329/files#r1633787713

Also, I want to ensure my PDB is guaranteed, so I can't taint the node directly.

[stack overflow link](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/55006205/how-to-prevent-pods-scheduling-to-a-node-after-a-pod-has-failed-on-it-in-gce)

Without `node-affinity-eviction`, I have to relabel the node to suggest data on that node is corrupted, 
and then manually iterating the pods on the node, decide whether to delete them to trigger a reschedule.
With `node-affinity-eviction`, the only thing I need to do is to relabel the node, and `node-affinity-eviction` controller will do the rest.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

N/A

### Risks and Mitigations

The major concern may be that during the eviction, some pods may fail to be evicted. Users can use `pod_failed_eviction_node_affinity_total` metric to find them.  

Typically, the reason for a failed eviction is due to a violation of the PDB. 
However, it is also possible that there could be issues with Kubernetes components or a misconfiguration. 
If the eviction of the target pod fails, users should first check if the eviction violates the pod's PDB configuration. 

> If it does violate the PDB, users should manually adjust the replica setting of the owner of the pod to ensure that the eviction no longer violates the PDB configuration. Alternatively, users can manually evict the pod.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If it does violate the PDB, users should manually adjust the replica setting of the owner of the pod to ensure that the eviction no longer violates the PDB configuration. Alternatively, users can manually terminate the pod.
```

eviction would not help here

Another thing users can check is whether there is incorrect configuration, such as multiple PodDisruptionBudgets referencing the same Pod.

> Abnormal states of kube-apiserver and controller-manager can also cause eviction failures, so they should also be among the objects that users should check.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
kube-apiserver and controller-manager logs can be also checked for failures.
```

	// at some point during pod execution (e.g. due to an update), the system
	// will try to eventually evict the pod from its node.
  // For v1alpha1, evictions are performed by calling the Eviction API.
  // This may change in later versions.
	// +optional
	RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution *NodeSelector
}
```

Add a controller called `node-affinity-eviction` 

The controller do the following things:

- Listening to the changes of node labels
- Iterating over all pods assigned to the node(excluding mirror pods), checks the NodeAffinity field, if `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` exists, checks if `NodeSelector` still match the new node. 
- If `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` is no loger met, trying to evict the pod.

- For alpha stage:
  - With each occurrence of a node label update event, a new eviction round is triggered. In each round of eviction, the controller will iterate through each pod on that node to determine whether the pod should be evicted.
  - It will use Eviction API to evict the pod(The API takes the PDBs into consideration, so we do not have to use the PDBs explicitly here). 

>   - If eviction for one pod fails, We will skip the eviction of the target pod in the current round. In the next eviction round, we will recheck the pod and may trigger eviction based on the results of the check.

Reviewer 2: This could cause the failed evictions' pods to become stale for a long time. Is there a resync for the eviction rounds?

Reviewer 2: I will deffer this to sig-scheduling folks. I think not having a resync/backoff could be quite annoying in some cases.

The Eviction API would solve this problems, but we are still discussing it (earliest possible is 1.32).

Reviewer 6: Not retrying would cause confusion and issues to be opened.

Not sure what the taint eviction controller does when there is a failure. Does the Eviction API give any indication of when you should retry? If not, maybe a retry with exponential backoff is enough?

Author: Currently, many of the open comments here are about retries, so I suggest we focus our discussion here.

> why would the eviction fail? Because of PDB?

1. Because evictions will violate PDB or there is a misconfiguration(like if multiple PodDisruptionBudgets reference the same Pod).
2.  Because API rate limiting or unhealthy component states.

In each case, I don't think immediate retry would help.

Currently, I'm considering the following approaches to address the issue of pods potentially not being retried for a long time:

1. Create an infinite loop for failed evictions' pods.
I think this would increase the burden on the controller, and I am not inclined towards this approach.

2. Retry with exponential backoff for failed evictions' pods.
The concern with this approach is that there is still a significant probability of eviction failures in recent retries if the PDB is not updated in a timely manner.

3. Make controller listening to the pdb updates/deletes and retrigger a new round of eviction.
This can address the first scenario of eviction failures, which accounts for the majority of the failures.
However, triggering evictions due to PDB updates would require traversing all pods, which could indeed impose a significant burden.
But the cost should be manageable considering that this is the current implementation approach of the descheduler, which involves periodically traversing each pod on every node?

Reviewer 7: > Not sure what the taint eviction controller does when there is a failure. Does the Eviction API give any indication of when you should retry? If not, maybe a retry with exponential backoff is enough?

Not presently, but we're discussing the ability to expand it with such functionality. For now don't rely on anything like that.

Reviewer 6: So is the suggestion not to do retries?

Reviewer 7: Retires will definitely not hurt, even today. In the long run, they hopefully should help. But for now I'd advice some kind of backoff for those retries. Maybe in the evolution we'll actually provide some hints when to retry. That's TBD :sweat_smile:

Author: > Can we hold another FIFO queue with a long retry duration, not blocking the eviction API.

We still need to traverse this queue right?  Because the head of the queue may never be evicted (if the PDB is not updated continuously)?
If yes, this seems like path 1 in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/4329#discussion_r1636453639, and the concern is the large memory consumption.

Reviewer 5: I have two designs in my mind:
- the first one is quite simple, we'll have a linked list to store the failed-to-evict Pods, it's a FIFO queue, and we'll pop out Pods from the head of the list every 2s, if the Pod stored in the list for more than 2s, let's retry, or wait for next iteration. Each iteration we'll pop out all  Pods that waiting more than 2s.
- the second one is we'll have a map to store the failed-to-evict Pods, each Pod will be wrapped with a timer, once countdown ends, the Pod will retry, the time can be exponential backoff, 1s, 2s, 4s ...

Considering Pod will never be retried successfully, we may have a limited retry times to avoid  the list/map is too large.

Reviewer 2: - I think we could just use exponential RateLimitingQueue with a big maximum delay
- Have we considered using the descheduler logic + descheduler framework? It is pretty minimal and we could have just one plugin for the node affinity eviction. And have an option to add different mechanisms in the future. https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/descheduler/blob/1c8ae64726f2de1da8240e297af156ea071a3de3/pkg/descheduler/descheduler.go#L385

Author: > Have we considered using the descheduler logic + descheduler framework?

I think ultimately we want current framework with evacuation api, since evacuation api can handle the retry logic.
This should have a better performance than descheduler logic.

Since this is not an urgent KEP, waiting for the evacuation API might be a better choice compared to directly incorporating the descheduler framework into the core Kubernetes and subsequently refactoring it. If we cannot accept the retry logic outlined at present.

Reviewer: Eesh. The term “evacuation” is being used in a sense quite different from its common technical meaning (similar to “drain”).

> - After the eviction in the current round is completed, we will print logs to record the pods that failed to be evicted. And increase the metric `pod_failed_eviction_node_affinity_total` labeled with pods' name. So that users can find out this and take care of the pod manually.

Reviewer 2: the logs should be of a lower verbosity or we could spam KCM into oblivion

For the beta stage, we will switch to using the [Evacuation API](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4563) if the user enables the corresponding feature gate. This will address a series of issues related to failed evictions.

After a node's label is updated, the DaemonSet controller will recalculate the eligible nodes where the DaemonSet pods can run. During this process, the DaemonSet controller will take the `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` into consideration, similar to `RequiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution`. 

### Test Plan

[x] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to
existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

##### Prerequisite testing updates

##### Unit tests

Currently coverages:
- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/scheduler/framework/plugins/nodeaffinity`: `2023-12-13` - `82.5`
- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/apis/core/validation`:`2023-12-13` - `83.9`

> - `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/controller/nodeaffinityeviction`:`2023-12-13` - `0` 

Reviewer 2: missing the daemonset controller parts

These tests will be added:
- New tests will be added to `/pkg/scheduler/framework/plugins/nodeaffinity` to ensure scheduler handles `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` correctly when the feature is enabled/disabled.
- New tests will be added to `/pkg/apis/core/validation` to ensure the validation logic for `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` is corrct when the feature is enabled/disabled.
- A new directory `/pkg/controller/nodeaffinityeviction` will be added
  - New tests will be added to ensure that evict is correctly triggered when the feature is enabled.
  - New tests will be added to ensure that evict is **not** triggered when the feature is disabled. 
  

> ##### Integration tests

Reviewer 2: needs a test for testing the eviction failures.

- See if this kep can align with `Evacuation API`

#### GA

- No negative feedback
- No bug issues reported

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

#### Upgrade
- Enable the feature gate in kube-apiserver, kube-controller-manager and kube-scheduler, and set `.spec.affinity.nodeAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` in pod.

#### Downgrade

- Disable the feature gate in kube-apiserver, kube-controller-manager and kube-scheduler, so that previously configured
  `.spec.affinity.nodeAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` value will be ignored.
- However, the `.spec.affinity.nodeAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` value of a Pod is preserved if it's previously configured; otherwise get silently dropped.

### Version Skew Strategy

kube-controller-manager, kube-scheduler and kube-apiserver will need to enable the feature gate for the full featureset
to be present. 

If kube-apiserver doesn't enable the feature gate, this new affinity will be silently dropped during pod creating, and will be silently dropped during pod updating if it's not been used.

If kube-apiserver enable the feature gate, and:

> if only the kube-controller-manager enables the feature gate, the node affinity will be ignored during the scheduling phase.

Reviewer 2: not for the deamonsets

> if only the kube-scheduler enables the feature gate, the node affinity will be ignored during the execution phase. 

Reviewer 2: + reverse here

Author: Not sure what you mean here😢.

Reviewer 6: I think Filip is asking that you explain that the daemonset controller would create pods for it, even though they will be unschedulable.

### Rollout, Upgrade and Rollback Planning

###### How can a rollout or rollback fail? Can it impact already running workloads?

It shouldn't impact already running workloads. It's an opt-in feature, and users need to set
`.spec.affinity.nodeAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` field to use this feature.

When this feature is disabled by the feature flag, the already created Pod's `.spec.affinity.nodeAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution`
field is preserved, however, the newly created Pod's `.spec.affinity.nodeAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` field is silently dropped.

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

We will introduce two new metric for this feature. Please refer to the "SLIs" section below for its specific meaning.
If the value of metric `pod_failed_eviction_node_affinity_total` or `evictions_node_affinity_total` is larger than expected, users should check their system and may need to rollback.

###### Were upgrade and rollback tested? Was the upgrade->downgrade->upgrade path tested?

> 

Reviewer 2: \+ deamonsets

N/A

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

- [x] Metrics
  - Metric name:
    - evictions_node_affinity_total(counts of the eviction/evacuation subresources created by the controller)
    - pod_failed_eviction_node_affinity_total(counts of the pods that failed to be evicted, labeled by pod name)
###### Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability of this feature?

Two new metric `evictions_node_affinity_total` and `pod_failed_eviction_node_affinity_total` will be added.

### Dependencies

N/A

###### Does this feature depend on any specific services running in the cluster?

No.

### Scalability

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new API calls?

- There will be calls to evict pods with eviction subresource. 

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in introducing new API types?

No.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new calls to the cloud provider?

No.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing size or count of the existing API objects?

> It increasing the size of `.spec.affinity.nodeAffinity` a little bit.

Reviewer 2: this should be more precise, please see the format in the kep-template

  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

This KEP aims to introduce node-affinity-based eviction.
In this KEP, we will introduce a new nodeAffinity type: `requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution`.

> A new controller called `node-affinity-eviction` will be added to the controller-manager. 

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
A new controller called `node-affinity-eviction` will be added to the kube-controller-manager.
```

This controller will monitor changes in node labels, and try to evict pods if their `requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` node affinity are no longer met.
If eviction fails, the pods that failed to be evicted will be rechecked for violations of the `requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` affinity during the next node label update. 
If, in the next eviction round, they still violate the `requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` affinity, they will be attempted for eviction again.
This controller will respect PDB during the eviction.

> We'll start using `Eviction API with PDB` to evict pods during alpha stage for simplicity, 
> and may transfer to `Evacuation API` in future stage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll start using _the Eviction API, respecting PDB_ to evict pods during alpha stage for simplicity, 
and may transfer to the _Evacuation API_ in future stage.
```

kube-apiserver and controller-manager logs can be also checked for failures.

## Design Details

Introducing a new type of NodeAffinity:
```go
type NodeSelector struct {
	NodeSelectorTerms []NodeSelectorTerm
}

type NodeAffinity struct {
  // If the affinity requirements specified by this field are not met at
  // scheduling time, the pod will not be scheduled onto the node.
  // If the affinity requirements specified by this field cease to be met
  // at some point during pod execution (e.g. due to an update), the system
  // will try to eventually evict the pod from its node.
  // For v1alpha1, evictions are performed by calling the Eviction API.
  // This may change in later versions.
  // +optional
  RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution *NodeSelector
}
```

Add a controller called `node-affinity-eviction` 

The controller do the following things:

- Listening to the changes of node labels
- Iterating over all pods assigned to the node(excluding mirror pods), checks the NodeAffinity field, if `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` exists, checks if `NodeSelector` still match the new node. 

> - If `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` is no loger met, trying to evict the pod.

Reviewer: Beyond alpha, do we need to account for a data race, where the node label changes before the Pod is bound to the node, because the kube-scheduler didn't have that particular update?

Kubernetes should aim to be eventually consistent here.

Author: Did you mean: 

1. node label changed
2. pod has finished shceduling, but not bound to node yet
3. we evict the pod?

This seems correct to me.

- Test that `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` node affinity is ignored during scheduling when the feature is disabled.
- Test that DaemonSet with `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` does not enter a scheduling and descheduling hot loop after being evicted. 
- Test that pods with `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` node affinity are  not evicted if the eviction violates the pod's PDB configuration. 

##### e2e tests

These tests will be added:
- `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` will be tested during both scheduling and execution.
  1. create a node that has a label
  2. create a pod with `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` node affinity matches the node.
  3. verify that the pod is correctly scheduled to the node
  4. remove the node label
  5. verify that the pod is evicted
  6. create a new pod with same template
  7. verify that the pod failed scheduling
  8. create a new node which label matches the pod's node-affinity
  9. verify that the pod created in 6 is scheduled to the new node
   
### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha

> - Feature implemented behind a feature flag

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
- Feature implemented behind a feature gate
```

- Remove the node label.
- Verify that the daemonSet pod on that node is evicted and not recreated.
- Add the node's label back.
- Verify that the daemonSet pod runs on the same node again.
  
- Re-start kube-controller-manager, kube-scheduler and kube-apiserver with feature gate disabled
- Verify the old `.spec.affinity.nodeAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` reserved
- Remove the node label 
- Verify that the pod is not evicted
- Add the node's label back 

- Re-start kube-controller-manager, kube-scheduler and kube-apiserver with feature gate enabled
- Remove the node label
- Verify that the daemonSet pod on that node is evicted and not recreated.

###### Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.?

No.

### Monitoring Requirements

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

- Check the corresponding metrics(details in SLIs part below).
- Inspect the `.spec.affinity.nodeAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` configuration.

###### How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their instance?

- [x] Events

>   - Event Reason: NodeAffinityEviction

Reviewer: How about
```suggestion
  - Event Reason: RequiredNodeAffinityViolation
```

- [x] API .status

>   - Condition reason: DeletionByNodeAffinityEvictionController 

Reviewer: How about this:
- `RequiredNodeAffinityViolation`

or maybe some of these:
- `NodeLabelsChanged`
- `NodeAffinityReconciliation` (eg, kube-controller-manager wins leader election, finds a violation)

We should aim to leave room for this field to one day become mutable, even if right now we think this is unlikely.

- [x] Other (treat as last resort)
  - Details: Pod with `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` must meet affinity rule during both the scheduling phase and the execution phase.

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

N/A

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

- [x] Metrics
  - Metric name:
    - evictions_node_affinity_total(counts of the eviction/evacuation subresources created by the controller)
    - pod_failed_eviction_node_affinity_total(counts of the pods that failed to be evicted, labeled by pod name)
###### Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability of this feature?

Two new metric `evictions_node_affinity_total` and `pod_failed_eviction_node_affinity_total` will be added.

### Dependencies

> 

Reviewer: Not exactly a dependency, but adding this is likely to mean changes to node autoscalers, so that they can correctly identify what kind of node to consider provisioning.

Reviewer: Should we avoid graduating to beta until at least one in-project autoscaler repo has been updated?

Author: > so that they can correctly identify what kind of node to consider provisioning.

That makes senese.
I'm curious how descheduler interact with autoscaler before.

Reviewer 6: I don't follow the relationship.

The cluster-autoscaler would only bring up nodes that match the node affinity. And, in particular, cluster-autoscaler uses the same code as kube-scheduler to determine this. So no changes needed there.

Reviewer: I'm suggesting we gate the beta graduation on one of the in project autoscalers updating to match. We can do that gating even if we think that this is likely to happen.

Reviewer 6: It will just happen automatically. But I'm ok with adding it.

> N/A

Reviewer: ```suggestion
None identified.
```

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in non-negligible increase of resource usage (CPU, RAM, disk, IO, ...) in any components?

The scheduler have to process `.spec.affinity.nodeAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` parameter which may result in some small increase in CPU usage.
A new controller will be added to kube-controller-manager and will also result in some small increase in CPU usage.

###### Can enabling / using this feature result in resource exhaustion of some node resources (PIDs, sockets, inodes, etc.)?

No.

### Troubleshooting

###### How does this feature react if the API server and/or etcd is unavailable?

During the downtime of API server and/or etcd:

- Running workloads that don't need to be evicted function well.
- Running workloads that need to be evicted by unmatched `.spec.affinity.nodeAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` will stay in current state
as API requests will be rejected.

###### What are other known failure modes?

> N/A

Reviewer: ```suggestion
None identified.
```

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

## Implementation History

- 2023-12-13: Initial draft KEP

## Drawbacks

N/A

## Alternatives

> - taints

Reviewer: (nit) These bullet points will work better as level 3 headings

  
  Taint can achieve this feature in some scenarios. But nodeaffinity has more operators for users to choose from to cover more scenarios.
  Also taints are meant to protect nodes, so they don't respect PDB.

- descheduler

> 

Reviewer: I'm guessing that you could enable the API server feature gate (only) and use the descheduler for the descheduling part, assuming we update that out-of-tree code.

Does this sound right?

Author: Yes, we can do that. However this requires some code changes in descheduler.

  However, descheduler also contains some features that are not implemented in this KEP. For example, reschedule of pods with `preferNodeAffinity`.
 

- some existing controller
  
  Creating a manager under some existing controller can implement this feature too.
  However, using a new controller can not only improves code organization but also makes it easier to improve affinity-related scheduling or build custom implementations of the affinity based eviction.
  For example, if we are going to implement RequiredDuringExecution podAffinity/podAntiAffinity in the furture, we can reuse this new affinity-controller.
  Also, the function of this controller is very independent. Implementing it under other controllers will not reduce a lot of redundant code.

- Implement it in kubelet
  
  This feature only cares about node labels and pod's node-affinity, it doesn't care other resources related to pod or node. As kubelet is already a rather complicated component, creating a separate controller can help improve code organization while achieving the goal, makes it easier to improve NodeAffinityEviction feature.

> ## Infrastructure Needed (Optional)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

No infrastructure needed

- This KEP does not aim to introduce the `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` **podAffinity** type and **podAntiAffinity** type.

## Proposal
- Implement the `requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` node affinity type.
- Update the kube-scheduler, kube-controller-manager and kube-apiserver.
- Define the behavior, syntax, and use cases in documentation.
- Facilitate testing, adoption, and maintenance of this feature.

### User Stories 

#### manage multi tenant cluster with dedicated nodes

I have some nodes labeled with "userA=allow" and "userB=allow", which means that these nodes are available to user A and user B.
As the scale grows I want to add new nodes only for user B while leaving the current nodes only for user A.
I want to migrate all pods available to user B to new nodes, and I want to ensure HA of my services during the migration.

Without `node-affinity-eviction`, I have to remove "userB=allow" label of node, and delete the pods manually. Also I can't use taints because they don't respect PDBs.
With `node-affinity-eviction`, I can simply delete the "userB=allow" label from the existing nodes 
to re-schedule all pods of user B to these new nodes.

> 

Reviewer 8: I know I'm late to the party, I just noticed this KEP is coming. 

So, I'm not sure if this user story is strong enough to support this feature, especially given implementing/maintaining a new controller is a huge cost.
Can we add some others? 

For this current scenario, why can't we just delete the pods actually (like via the deployment(s) restarts)? You're trying to argue that that's too troublesome? If you ask your ChatGPT, it'll give you a simple script to do that in a few sec.

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

This KEP aims to introduce node-affinity-based eviction.
In this KEP, we will introduce a new nodeAffinity type: `requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution`.
A new controller called `node-affinity-eviction` will be added to the controller-manager. 
This controller will monitor changes in node labels, and try to evict pods if their `requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` node affinity are no longer met.
If eviction fails, the pods that failed to be evicted will be rechecked for violations of the `requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` affinity during the next node label update. 
If, in the next eviction round, they still violate the `requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` affinity, they will be attempted for eviction again.
This controller will respect PDB during the eviction.

We'll start using `Eviction API with PDB` to evict pods during alpha stage for simplicity, 

> and transfer to `Evacuation API` in beta stage.

Author: I agree that they shouldn't be tightly coupled. Changed to `may transfer` as a note

- Explore a fine way to bring more descheduler features into core kubernetes(e.g. podAffinityEviction)
- DaemonSet controller will take the `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` into consideration, 
when recalculating the eligible nodes where the DaemonSet pods can run.

### Non-Goals

- This KEP does not aim to introduce the `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` **podAffinity** type and **podAntiAffinity** type.

## Proposal
- Implement the `requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` node affinity type.
- Update the kube-scheduler, kube-controller-manager and kube-apiserver.
- Define the behavior, syntax, and use cases in documentation.
- Facilitate testing, adoption, and maintenance of this feature.

### User Stories (Optional)

#### manage multi tenant cluster with dedicated nodes

I have some nodes labeled with "userA=allow" and "userB=allow", which means that these nodes are available to user A and user B.
As the scale grows I want to add new nodes only for user B while leaving the current nodes only for user A.
I want to migrate all pods available to user B to new nodes, and I want to ensure HA of my services during the migration.

> Without `node-affinity-eviction`, I have to remove "userB=allow" label of node, and delete the pods manually.

Reviewer 6: Add that you can't use taints because they don't respect PDBs.

With `node-affinity-eviction`, the only thing I need to do is to relabel the node, and `node-affinity-eviction` controller will do the rest.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

N/A

### Risks and Mitigations

The major concern may be that during the eviction, some pods may fail to be evicted. Users can use `pod_failed_eviction_node_affinity_total` metric to find them.  

Typically, the reason for a failed eviction is due to a violation of the PDB. 
However, it is also possible that there could be issues with Kubernetes components or a misconfiguration. 
If the eviction of the target pod fails, users should first check if the eviction violates the pod's PDB configuration. 
If it does violate the PDB, users should manually adjust the replica setting of the owner of the pod to ensure that the eviction no longer violates the PDB configuration. Alternatively, users can manually terminate the pod.
Another thing users can check is whether there is incorrect configuration, such as multiple PodDisruptionBudgets referencing the same Pod.
kube-apiserver and controller-manager logs can be also checked for failures.

> Another concern may be the overhead of the nodes with a large number of pods. 

Reviewer 6: This concern doesn't seem significant compared to existing kubernetes features.

Author: removed.

- Iterating over all pods assigned to the node(excluding mirror pods), checks the NodeAffinity field, if `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` exists, checks if `NodeSelector` still match the new node. 
- If `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` is no loger met, trying to evict the pod.

- For alpha stage:
  - With each occurrence of a node label update event, a new eviction round is triggered. In each round of eviction, the controller will iterate through each pod on that node to determine whether the pod should be evicted.
  - It will use Eviction API to evict the pod(The API takes the PDBs into consideration, so we do not have to use the PDBs explicitly here). 
  - If eviction for one pod fails, We will skip the eviction of the target pod in the current round. In the next eviction round, we will recheck the pod and may trigger eviction based on the results of the check.

- After the eviction in the current round is completed, we will print logs to record the pods that failed to be evicted. And increase the metric `pod_failed_eviction_node_affinity_total` labeled with pods' name. So that users can find out this and take care of the pod manually.

> - To avoid any disruption to KCM caused by excessive logging, the logs will be kept minimal, containing only the names of the pods, ensuring simplicity.

Reviewer 2: I would propose a debug level here

> For the beta stage, we will switch to using the [Evacuation API](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4563) if the user enables the corresponding feature gate. This will address a series of issues related to failed evictions.

Reviewer 6: Remove this for now.

- [x] Metrics
  - Metric name:
    - evictions_node_affinity_total(counts of the eviction/evacuation subresources created by the controller)
    - pod_failed_eviction_node_affinity_total(counts of the pods that failed to be evicted, labeled by pod name)
###### Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability of this feature?

Two new metric `evictions_node_affinity_total` and `pod_failed_eviction_node_affinity_total` will be added.

### Dependencies

N/A

###### Does this feature depend on any specific services running in the cluster?

No.

### Scalability

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new API calls?

- There will be calls to evict pods with eviction subresource. 

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in introducing new API types?

No.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in any new calls to the cloud provider?

No.

###### Will enabling / using this feature result in increasing size or count of the existing API objects?

- No to existing API objects that doesn't use this feature.
- For API objects that use this feature:
  - API type: Pod

>   - Estimated increase in size: new field `.spec.affinity.nodeAffinity.` about 72 bytes.

Reviewer 2: Expressing it by a number is probably not enough, and needs a more verbose explanation of what is the expected increase, since we can have multiple NodeSelectorTerm

Author: Added an explanation.

- Define the behavior, syntax, and use cases in documentation.
- Facilitate testing, adoption, and maintenance of this feature.

### User Stories (Optional)

#### manage multi tenant cluster with dedicated nodes

I have some nodes labeled with "userA=allow" and "userB=allow", which means that these nodes are available to user A and user B.
As the scale grows I want to add new nodes only for user B while leaving the current nodes only for user A.
I want to migrate all pods available to user B to new nodes, and I want to ensure HA of my services during the migration.

Without `node-affinity-eviction`, I have to remove "userB=allow" label of node, and delete the pods manually. Also I can't use taints because they don't respect PDBs.
With `node-affinity-eviction`, I can simply delete the "userB=allow" label from the existing nodes 
to re-schedule all pods of user B to these new nodes.

#### handle data locality pods when data is corrupted

I have one application whose pods need to be co-located with some specific data stored in some particular nodes. 
When one node's storage is corrupted, the pod on this node will provide some inaccurate services.

> So I want it to be scheduled to another special node when data is detected to be corrupted.

Reviewer 6: In this case, we shouldn't respect PDB, but this feature intends to respect PDB.

So, should this story be removed?

Author: This can be an example where we don't need to adhere to PDB, and I am inclined to retain it. While taints can achieve this in most cases, we mentioned  in Alternatives section that this offers greater flexibility compared to taints.

Reviewer 7: Whenever you're using evictions API you're automatically respecting PDB, which is one of the main premises of this document. So I'm with Aldo on this one, that we should not provide counterexamples.

- Remove the node label
- Verify that the daemonSet pod on that node is evicted and not recreated.

###### Is the rollout accompanied by any deprecations and/or removals of features, APIs, fields of API types, flags, etc.?

No.

### Monitoring Requirements

###### How can an operator determine if the feature is in use by workloads?

- Check the corresponding metrics(details in SLIs part below).
- Inspect the `.spec.affinity.nodeAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` configuration.

###### How can someone using this feature know that it is working for their instance?

- [x] Events
  - Event Reason: NodeAffinityEviction
- [x] API .status
  - Condition reason: DeletionByNodeAffinityEvictionController 
- [x] Other (treat as last resort)
  - Details: Pod with `RequiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` must meet affinity rule during both the scheduling phase and the execution phase.

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

N/A

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

- [x] Metrics
  - Metric name:

>     - evictions_node_affinity_total(counts of the eviction/evacuation subresources created by the controller)

Author: > if we can tell the reason here like rejected because PDB

We can't do it currently as both rate limited and violation of pdb will return a 429 status. This depends on the update of the eviction API.

>     - evictions_node_affinity_total(counts of the eviction/evacuation subresources created by the controller)

Reviewer 5: Ticked an issue here: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/125500

>     - pod_failed_eviction_node_affinity_total(counts of the pods that failed to be evicted, labeled by pod name)

Author: We need to expose failed eviction pods to users, and one possible solution we have thought of is using a metric.

Agree this may lead to memory consumption and performance issue, but we need this unless we came up another way to expose information to users.

### Troubleshooting

###### How does this feature react if the API server and/or etcd is unavailable?

During the downtime of API server and/or etcd:

- Running workloads that don't need to be evicted function well.
- Running workloads that need to be evicted by unmatched `.spec.affinity.nodeAffinity.requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` will stay in current state
as API requests will be rejected.

###### What are other known failure modes?

N/A

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

## Implementation History

- 2023-12-13: Initial draft KEP

## Drawbacks

N/A

## Alternatives

- taints
  
  Taint can achieve this feature in some scenarios. But nodeaffinity has more operators for users to choose from to cover more scenarios.
  Also taints are meant to protect nodes, so they don't respect PDB.

- descheduler

  Bringing a new component to the system introduces both a lot of uncertainty and additional learning costs. And as a basic feature, this should be part of kubernetes.
  If users only wants to remove pods violating `requiredNodeAffinity`, they can remove descheduler from their system after this feature is implemented.

>   However, descheduler also contains some features that are not implemented in this KEP. For example, reschedule of pods with `preferNodeAffinity`.

Author: Descheduler will remove `requiredNodeAffinity` eventually.

>   However, descheduler also contains some features that are not implemented in this KEP. For example, reschedule of pods with `preferNodeAffinity`.

Reviewer 5: Worth to be part of the KEP.

>   However, descheduler also contains some features that are not implemented in this KEP. For example, reschedule of pods with `preferNodeAffinity`.

Reviewer 2: I am not that familiar with descheduler, but I do not see how they can remove a `RemovePodsViolatingNodeAffinity` plugin since it operates on `requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution` which is a different affinity field. This field will still exist and have applications using it and can be part of the descheduling strategy.

>   However, descheduler also contains some features that are not implemented in this KEP. For example, reschedule of pods with `preferNodeAffinity`.

Author: In the end, we want users to switch from `requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution` to `requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution` if they want pods to be evicted. Since the former affinity declares `IgnoredDuringExecution`, it indicates that the pod should not be evicted. The reason descheduler is evicting it is because the API does not currently declare `requiredDuringSchedulingRequiredDuringExecution`.

This will require multiple iterations to prevent disruptions to existing services.

>   However, descheduler also contains some features that are not implemented in this KEP. For example, reschedule of pods with `preferNodeAffinity`.

Reviewer 4: `RemovePodsViolatingNodeAffinity` descheduling plugin can be adjusted to address only certain corner/different cases. Something we will need to discuss as we go and users start adopting the new controller.
